# On Aether

Interview conducted by Pauline Eiferman     
June 6, 2010

An interview for an article about "how the internet is changing the way artists collaborate and work today."

**Pauline Eiferman** — Firstly, I am interested in how the project started and what exactly it aims to do.

**Manuel Schmalstieg** — Technically, the project was initiated during a  workshop given by the N3krozoft Media Group during Mapping Festival in Geneva, May 2007. The objective of the workshop was to devise methods for realtime visual collaboration in a performative context (Mapping Festival is an event dedicated to VJing).

During this workshop, a few people met on-location for the first time, and a group of people joined remotely (after a massive call-for-participation mailing) from Paris, Berlin, Brussels, the US, Colombia, Slovenia.

After the workshop, the group continued the work and new members joined the effort. We try to keep it very open, following methods that are used in open source software development.

Our objective: achieving new forms of art, by mixing existing forms (video, cinema, theatre) with current technical tools, most importantly the various network protocols. There are many "one-to-one" audiovisual communication tools, also a few "one-to-many" tools, but it's very difficult to achieve "many-to-many" communication. Our project is a practical/artistic attempt to solve this problem.

The main inspiration for the Mapping Festival workshop were projects carried out in the very early 80s by several artist groups, such as *Electronic Cafe* by K. Galloway and S. Rabinowitz in 1984, or *The world in 24 hours* by Robert Adrian in 1982 (see http://1904.cc/timeline/ for sources).

**PE** – What role do you believe the internet can have in the creation of art today?

**MS** – What is most significant to me, is that Tim Berners-Lee originally conceived the www (and the first browser) as a "read-write" medium, where every user would have the ability to write, therefore to create. This philosophy (or "feature") was quickly dropped by the main browser producers. Fortunately it has been brought back with the rise of wikis and "content management systems".

One barrier, for artists, is that wikis and CMSes are text-based. Video on the web still suffers from many issues, as we see with the current struggles between h264, ogg, etc.

One wonderful example of "video management" by/for artists is http://pad.ma

**PE** – Could you talk about one specific video that is part of the project, and how it used the internet in its creation?

**MS** – I was never really satisfied with our "video archives". It's like with most peformance art, you cannot understand the intensity of the work when watching archival recordings. Maybe they will be interesting to watch again in 10 years.

I will mention the "Aether9 LRRH archive remix", though. One function that we implemented in our streaming tool, during the "Little Red Riding Hood" performances in 2008, was an automated script that uploaded one video frame per minute to a special "archive" server. 

After a few months, I retrieved those thousands of images, and combined them into this "automated remix", that consists of many little fragments of rehearsals and performances. The soundtrack of the video is the live sound-mix that I made for the Montreal performance (at Perte-de-Signal, August 2008).